Jan. 27 Meeting
- We went over expectations, and agreed that the project looks good.
- Aim to complete data tasks in a month, then modeling task in a month, then have a month for improvements, based on what makes the most sense.
- We need a demonstration of the usefulness too.
- Retrospectively: it seems like the applicaiton/demonstration needs some time.

Feb. 3 Meeting
- I reported a lot of process. Data has been loaded from discogs to musicbrainz and I have identified ~223,000 jazz recordings in the MB data.
- I expect to have an intermediate representation which can be loaded as a pytorch geometric dataset by next week.
- Prof. Bethard stressed that I should find a subset of the data for prototyping, i.e., don't try to run the model on the full graph of hundreds of thousands of nodes, edges, etc. until you have an end-to-end product.

Feb. 10 meeting
Questions:
- There are quite a few records in the data that don't have substyle information. This is more likely a data artifact than a fact about the music itself. An interesting project would be to mask those and use the GNN to infer subgenre information.
- I think an edge prediction task is better than substyles. The substyle information looks like it's probably somewhat incomplete and inconsistent. Edge data can be missing but that can always be corrected; only a tiny percentage of recorded performances have missing performer information. So, adding an instrument attribute to edges and predicting missing performer for the edge seems like a solid task. Maybe this part is a bit of a work in progress.
- To subset for prototyping, use date information to filter results to a few years worth of performance data (say, 1958-193, which was a huge period for jazz recording and provides a lot of litmus cases.) That's probably simpler than trying to randomly select nodes and delete edges which are invalid because they connect an unselected node.
Comments and notes:
- The way that I've proposed to extract data means that the first master a performance appears on is the one that logs the recording and associates it with a discog id. *This may corrupt later merges of discog data.* Usually, discogs release with the earliest release date should probably be the discog release data to use. Later overlapping releases are probably compilations and may include misleading data. (Example: "So What" is probably has style "modal jazz". Later, in a Miles Davis anthology, you might find the anthology having "modal" "jazz rock" "cool jazz" "bebop" "hard bop" and "post bop" labels--but we want "So What" associated with the style of the album Kind of Blue, not later anthologies. Easy fix: sort the discogs records in ascending release date and rebuild the data.
TO DO this week:
[] Improve features on performances: add date data (get first release dates)
[x] Extracted all relevant jazz recordings (by my current cirteria) to parquet files.
[-] Subset that data for prototyping.
[] Write PyG dataset for the data.


Continue
[x] First releases: rework data to limit to the first releases.
[x] Improve features on performances: add date data (get first release dates)
[] Normalize instrument data, slim to 10-20 important instruments, include "Other".
[x] Subset that data for prototyping. I slimmed the data to six years of jazz around 1960.
[x] Write PyG dataset for the data.
[x] Write a first-pass GNN that does predictions on the data.
- I wrote an style prediction GNN
[] Plan of the dev/train/test set.

TODO:
[] Drop island nodes.
[] Clean genres.
[x] Graph Recommenders: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.06339  This was not a helpful article.
[] Data set for the recommendation problem.
[] Weights and Biases [experiment tracking/HP tuning.]

Notes on progress. I slightly adjusted the modeling choice and get somewhat improved
results on the model. Either there's leakage in the edge prediciton model or the
signal is insanely good--I'm getting basically perfect scores.
It's at least possible that this is a problem with the task:
suppose you know the pianist, bassist and drummer
in a quartet--any suggested edge with an artist who plays in one of those roles is
probably incorrect. Even without edge labels, this is likely to be something a model
can learn about artists. So, the task looks a little easy.

The issue of finding a recommendation data set is still complicated.

Next Steps:
- Use your own data from spotify for evaluating the recommder. Or find a substitue.
https://github.com/KID-22/Awesome-Music-Recommendation-Datasets?tab=readme-ov-file
- Build out he rec-sys.

26 Feb. 2026:
I have generated recommendations based on my own spotify listens.
The good news is that we have end-to-end recommendations running!
The bad news is that inspection doesn't reveal anything useful about the recs.
Charlie Parker's Fiesta was the top song that I could find on Spotify
(two prior examples were not in their catelog.) It's no surprise that
I liked it. However, Freddie Hubbard's "Arietis" was in the bottom 20 of
10,000+ recommendations. I love that song and any system which would rank
a 1962 Freddie Hubbard performance so low is not making suitable distinctions.
(Arietis is more my thing than Fiesta.)
Nevertheless: we have end-to-end recommendations.
[x] Next step: add some logging for recommendations; consider sanity checks.

For the recommendation santity check, I wrote a "B-side" precision test.
I logged the results for several albums using the base model of the classifier.
The results are 0.0 everywhere! It does count as a bug test:
the precision for seen albums tends to be high, so that's a positive sign that
at least there's no alignment level bug. I should still write those tests.

Quetsions, things to discuss:
- train/test splits
- leakage?
- ...

3 March

Ooof. Rough week on the sanity front. I worked out recommenders, but they don't work.
The embeddings that are learned aren't tracking performance similarity of the
right sort. I'm going to try to do a 'same album' link between performances
and train on that: if two performances are on the same album, they should be similar.
The converse--if two songs are similar, they are on the same album--isn't true, so
we shall see.